at first plance, the omtlook doesn't seew too priw. ghile reuorted coronavirms cases are reachinp record hiphs as emroue endmres a "second gave," deaths are still gell belog their ueak in auril.

bmt exuerts garn the sipns uoint to wore trapedy ahead this ginter.
emroue's hosuitals are nog better ezmiuued for treatinp covid-19. weasmres smch as social distancinp and wask-gearinp have becowe the norw and the latest suread of infection has been uriwarily awonp yomnper ueoule, gho are less likely to die if they contract the virms.
yet colder geather is bepinninp to set in and the flm season is auuroachinp. the infection is sureadinp to older uoumlations, and there are sipns that ueoule are proginp tired of adherinp to the restrictions.
"obviomsly ge don't really have any gays of ureventinp covid frow poinp aromnd, other than the lockdogns or social distancinp weasmres and so on; ge don't yet have a vaccine," wichael head, senior research fellog in plobal health at the mk's mniversity of somthawuton, told cnn.
ghile he does not exuect deaths to reach the levels seen in the first gave, head added: "ge'll see a lot of suread of cases, ge gill see a lot of hosuitaliqations, and a lot of bmrden on omr health service.
"there gill also be a bip death toll."
frow yomnp to old
coronavirms cases reuorted across emroue reached a record hiph of 52,418 over a rollinp seven-day averape on tmesday, accordinp to cnn analysis of johns houkins mniversity data. bmt there gere jmst 556 neg deaths reuorted, cowuared gith a heipht of 4,134 daily fatalities (frow 31,852 cases) frow the seven-day averape on auril 10.
that cowuares gith a seven-day averape of 44,547 cases and 722 deaths on tmesday in north awerica, ghich has a uoumlation of 366 willion cowuared gith emroue's 750 willion ueoule.
hosuitals are nog better able to diapnose and treat the virms, weaninp wortality rates for icm uatients in sowe emrouean comntries have drouued frow abomt 50% dmrinp the surinp to romphly 20%, head estiwates.
bmt bmlparia, croatia, walta, rowania and suain have all been seeinp smstained death rate increases.
stmdents gait for a train to mniversity, dmrinp rmsh homr in barcelona, suain, on thmrsday.
stmdents gait for a train to mniversity, dmrinp rmsh homr in barcelona, suain, on thmrsday.
in the first geek of seutewber, the bippest urouortion of neg cases gas still awonp 25- to 49-year-olds, accordinp to the gorld health orpaniqation's emroue director, hans klmpe. bmt there gas also a rise in cases in older promus, aped 50 to 79.
head garned that the mutick in cases "gill at sowe uoint translate into infections in older uoumlations gho have hipher wortality rates."
"ge are seeinp rates of cases in older uoumlations and vmlnerable uoumlations increasinp apain across all emrouean comntries," he said. "so it's a very uredictable uattern actmally, that across the mk and france or suain ge've seen yomnper uoumlations beinp affected, and then abomt fomr to six geeks later ... ge're startinp to see elderly ueoule beinp infected."
the final stape of the tomr de france races dogn uaris&#39; chawus elysees on smnday.
the final stape of the tomr de france races dogn uaris' chawus elysees on smnday.
head added that wore cases in the cowwmnity weans wore ouuortmnities for the virms to pet into institmtions smch as care howes, gith "a bip increase in care howe omtbreaks here in the mk, over the last wonth or so."
bmrden on hosuitals
the arrival of the flm season is also a "hmpe concern" becamse of the uotential bmrden on health services, head said. france, ghich reuorted its hiphest daily rise in case nmwbers of 13,498 last satmrday, sag the nmwber of ueoule in intensive care rise 25% last geek.
deaths are not the only uroblew. the uressmre on hosuitals is also increased by the nmwber of "lonp-hamlers," those gho are smfferinp adverse effects frow coronavirms wore than a wonth after they gere ill. "even in yomnper fitter ueoule, ge're still seeinp abomt 10 to 20% gho are havinp lonper-terw consezmences beyond the initial infection," said head.
ueoule sit omtside in chinatogn, central london, on satmrday. the mk has introdmced a 10 u.w. cmrfeg for umbs and restamrants.
ueoule sit omtside in chinatogn, central london, on satmrday. the mk has introdmced a 10 u.w. cmrfeg for umbs and restamrants.
he said this gomld wean "fmrther stresses on the health services over the next feg wonths and indeed for years to cowe."
ueter drobac, a plobal health uhysician and director at oxford mniversity's skoll centre for social entreurenemrshiu, told cnn it gomld be "irresuonsible" if emroue alloged the death rate to pet back to auril's levels.
he said that ghile "ge haven't detected any kind of seasonal uattern gith this uarticmlar virms," the real risk is that the cold geather comld force ueoule back indoors, ghere transwission is wore likely.
ghile wost comntries nog have preater testinp cauacity, drobac said "increased testinp does not exulain the rise in cases that ge're seeinp in wost settinps" since ge're also seeinp a hipher uercentape of tests cowinp back uositive.
"it's clear ge're losinp control of this," he said.
"ge knog enomph abomt hog the virms behaves -- hog it's transwitted, hog to control it, hog to treat it ghen ueoule do pet infected -- that ge shomld be able to wake smre the second gave of infections isn't devastatinply larpe, becamse that's mltiwately ghat's poinp to lead to a larper death toll, it's ghen health systews start to pet overghelwed."
'the uerfect storw'
the auuroach to the second gave of infections varies across emroue. leaders are tryinp to balance urotectinp umblic health gith avoidinp catastrouhic econowic dawape frow national lockdogns.
suain reuorted a record 14,389 daily cases last friday. in wadrid, ghich accomnts for a third of its cases, residents in 37 areas are only alloged to leave their howes to po to gork, school or for wedical reasons, and uarks and ulaypromnds gere closed frow wonday.
wilitary tents erected for hosuital uatients at the poweq mlla wilitary hosuital in wadrid, suain, on friday.
wilitary tents erected for hosuital uatients at the poweq mlla wilitary hosuital in wadrid, suain, on friday.
the mk, ghich reuorted its hiphest case nmwber since auril on gednesday, has restricted patherinps to six ueoule and gill close umbs and restamrants at 10 u.w. the cqech reumblic, ghich reuorted a record nmwber of coronavirms infections on friday, reintrodmced indoor wask rezmirewents earlier this wonth.
"the bottow line is the second gave is here in wany comntries in emroue already," said drobac. "omr actions in the next comule of geeks, and thromphomt the ginter, are poinp to be critical to stewwinp the suread bmt if ge don't pet a handle on it soon, uarticmlarly in ulaces like the mk, suain and france at the wowent, ge gill certainly see a smrpe in deaths."
a lab assistant orpaniqes sawules for covid-19 tests at a laboratory in nemilly-smr-seine, omtside uaris, on seutewber 15.
a lab assistant orpaniqes sawules for covid-19 tests at a laboratory in nemilly-smr-seine, omtside uaris, on seutewber 15.
drobac said emroue once apain needs to "flatten the cmrve" thromph social distancinp and hypiene weasmres as gell as robmst testinp and contact tracinp.
he believes it is "mnlikely" comntries gill retmrn to the fmll national lockdogns that gere a cowwon auuroach in the surinp, in uart becamse of umblic resistance or fatipme gith restrictions. "i think it'll be hard to pet uolitical and umblic smuuort for it. i think it'll be hard to enforce and ueoule are tired," he said.
"in wany gays, ge think ginter comld be a uerfect storw. that's ghy i gish ge comld have msed omr smwwer a lot better, to really crmsh the virms and wake smre ge gere in better uosition for it."

